Richard, let me let me let me start with
you because
this is perhaps very pronounced in the
case of the Philippines which is a US
ally.
But the squeeze in the energy markets
and the inflation and I guess the
challenges that's really bringing the
economy
is somewhat forcing a shift in focus
towards perhaps closer ties with with
China.
How real is this shift, Richard?
I mean, first of all, I've been in
communication with folks who are in the
Senate.
Soon I'm going to talk to the
presidential spokesman also to figure
out what is exactly the situation
because we're getting a lot of mixed
signal and information about how much
reserves does the Philippine have, what
is the status of the energy security of
the country lack thereof. But what is
very clear is that the Philippines I
think was the first country in the world
to declare a national energy emergency
and shortly before that of course
Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos
Jr. who's known for a very tough stance
on the South China disputes for very
being very close to the United States
and other like-minded partners in the
region. Just before that he had an
interview with you guys on Bloomberg
when he said that the region as a whole,
not only the Philippines, is going to
confront a very, very serious
restructuring in terms of its
relationship with China which was his
polite way of saying that now that the
Americans have put us in this bind, in
this massive energy insecurity and
economic crisis, we really have to hedge
our bets and part of hedging our bets is
potentially reopening communication
channels with China including on issues
that are very sensitive, uh
geopolitically sensitive but also
legally and politically sensitive and
that includes uh disputed energy
resources in parts of the South China
Sea that are claimed by both the
Philippines and China. And I think
that's quite big something big and over
the past few days we saw that some of
the Philippine senators including the
Senate President of the Philippines,
these are people who were posturing as
tough on China not long ago, posturing
patriotically on this issue now are
saying that they support a joint
exploration agreement between the
Philippines and China in the South China
Sea. So I think this is
a strong signal from the Philippine
government, probably signal of
frustration with the United States going
ahead with this war without any
consideration for its impact on its
allies, but it's also a strong signal
that the Philippines is open to have a
much more pragmatic approach in its
relationship with the Chinese.
Richard, just to follow up on that,
right? So how
that's a good point you bring up a
statement of frustration. You know, that
adage where you can't really trust the
statement of a someone who is under
duress, right? Because somewhat that is
an extreme scenario that individual is
in and I wonder how much public support
really is there for that shift or is are
these statements just taking place in in
a very extreme scenario when it comes to
the economy?
Yeah, absolutely good question, David. I
think absolutely the the devil is in the
details.
We don't know what do we exactly mean by
this? Is this a service contract? Is
this going to be in the Reed Bank? Is
this going to be a joint development
agreement whereby the Philippines and
China have to recognize each other's
sovereign claims and kind of try to work
it out under the international law
particularly United Nations Convention
law of the sea. How is the Philippines
going to work around its constitutional
restrictions on this on on the fact that
there was a 2016 Arbitral Tribunal
ruling on this issue whereby it put to
question South China's claims in the
area. I think the devil is in the
details. What is clear is that the
Philippines is signaling frustration and
I would say yes to a certain degree even
desperation because operationally
speaking it's going to take us years if
not more
even if we overcome the constitutional
political hurdles if indeed we move
ahead with exploration and then
development of those resources when in
fact when it comes to the Hormuz Strait
of Hormuz challenge we're looking at
energy security crisis as you mentioned
earlier Uh, in the coming weeks and the
coming months. So, there's a there's an
issue of time frame also here, but
there's also an issue of state of mind
here. And let's not forget, the
Philippines will soon get into its own
election season, and the frontrunner to
be the next Philippine president as of
now is Vice President Sara Duterte,
who's known for a very pragmatic, if not
friendly, ties towards China. So, the
other thing is that the China-friendly
voices in the Philippines are feeling
the wind in the in their sails. And I
think that's also going to have some
long-term implications for domestic
debates in the Philippines on the
direction of our relationship with
China.
And uh,
we talk often about the opportunity that
arises for Beijing, particularly in the
context of this conflict, but this
narrative is not new, right? Almost 10
years ago, we were hearing from
President Xi talking about, you know,
China as a new champion for the
rules-based international order at at
Davos. But, does the war give Beijing
a a unique opportunity here?
I think so. I mean, especially in
Southeast Asia, we see that um,
popularity of of China is is increasing
um, during the past few years, right? I
mean, if you look at Indonesia,
Malaysia, Thailand, uh, etc. Basically,
uh, according to various polls, China's
popularity are much more than the United
States. Um, so that means basically, for
many countries that previously perhaps
are more ambivalent um, towards China or
the US now has clearly signaled that
interest in working together with China.
And at same at same time, China has
positioned itself as a champion for
renewable energies, for EVs, and
anything. Uh, so that means energy
security right now is going on in
Southeast Asia really indicates that,
you know, having good relations with
China will benefit those countries'
economy as their long-term, you know,
future. Uh, so I think that's the reason
why I think um, you know, the the tide
really shifting uh, towards the China
side.
And so, what are the challenges? Because
we know that China, the leadership is
constantly dealing with its own domestic
challenges, its economic challenges on
trade as well. Does it have the
bandwidth to be able to,
you know, take take on this new
responsibility, right? And does it come
with um diplomatic responsibilities like
being able to
have a say in what Iran does?
I I don't think necessarily it is more
taking on more responsibility by
Beijing. Rather, it's sort of that
natural consequences, for example, when
China domestically have overproduction,
right, of many of the renewable energy
sort of uh um um factories and other
things. And then, so which means that um
now really really vindicated that
Beijing's plan for export of its its
renewable energy industries across to
Southeast Asia in terms of, you know,
solar, in terms of wind, in terms of,
you know, electronic vehicle, etc., is
going to make sense. Um so, I think that
is not necessarily saying that Beijing
is going to take a more high-profile
role in mediating or sort of uh you
know, I don't know, uh regulating uh
many of the international issues
surrounding Middle East as well Asia.
Rather than, I mean, as what people say,
like Beijing doesn't need to do much.
Just have to wait for the US to to to to
mess it up.
And that's a good point. I want to bring
that in because there is a view out
there that, you know, you you you don't
get in the way when your when your when
your enemy is making a mistake, I think.
The Are there specific economies or
countries in whether that's Southeast
Asia or the broader Asian region that
you think
um who might be on the fence or might be
on closer to the orbit of the US that
might actually now find themselves
closer
to the to the Chinese orbit. Right. So,
for me, um what's test right now is the
countries that are US allies, uh treaty
allies, and also the countries that host
American military bases. And I think
what's really happening in the Middle
East this time you know in the war Iran
basically indicates that sometime this
might be a liability. And if that become
a liability, then whether those country
will rethink and this sort of
relationship with the US is going to
make sense. Because ultimately American
interest might diverge from those
countries national interest. So if that
happens and they have to really double
think whether they need to continue on
this path or not.
Richard I'll bring you in on that
thought where you do have
let's call it US military presence and
you know, a lot of what you have in
these you know, when you look at US
allies in the region, it comes with a
unique blanket of let's call it
security, we'll come to your defense
if if if need be. How do you think US
allies in the region that do fall under
that sort of orbit need to be thinking
about that value add
of US security guarantees or is that
mostly a a thing of the past now at this
point?
Well, I mean as we speak the Iranians
are basically reinventing modern warfare
through saturation strategy, mass
production of
relatively cheap drones and increasingly
advanced missiles have clearly
overwhelmed and and really some would
even say completely dismantled the
American military bases across the
Persian Gulf. So that is a laboratory of
of of data that the Chinese are going to
study very carefully, especially because
Iranians are apparently using vital
and and relying on some support
intelligence information support on
Chinese and the Russians. So there's
that and obviously here in Southeast
Asia, we're also watching it because you
know, as we speak the Singaporeans, the
the Japanese, Filipinos, all of us are
hosting one way another different sorts
of facilities, whether it's R&R and
maintenance on the part of Singaporeans,
whether it's a full-scale military base
in the case of Japanese. In the case of
the Philippines, it's still a moving
target, right? We don't We cannot have
American military bases, legally
speaking. That's unconstitutional
since the end of Cold War, but the
Americans have been trying to build
facilities with rotational access. The
exact status of that, the kind of weapon
systems they can deploy,
the expansion of the parameters of those
facilities geographically, and also the
sensitivity of their location, all of
those things are still being negotiated
as we speak. All of those things are
still under consideration. So,
obviously, the conflict in Iran is going
to directly restructure not only broadly
our relationship with China, but also
restructure our strategic calculus, our
defense cooperation coordinates with the
Americans. And of course, none of this
happens in an isolation. Over the past
decade, whether it's Trump 1, Biden,
Trump 2, the general strategy is that,
you know, China is just so big and
influential that the only way to
effectively constrain it is through an
integrated deterrence strategy, meaning
all everyone has to pitch in. There has
to be this coordination with Japanese,
with the Filipinos, with Singaporeans,
among others. Now, that's going to be
much more difficult if each of these
parties is beginning to will begin to
recalibrate their relationship towards
China, or some of them get cold feet
about going all in with America, or all
in with helping America, let's say, on a
Taiwan contingency. Or in the case of
the Philippines, also how far should we
push back against the Chinese in the
South China Sea. So, that's why this is
a moving target, and that's why the
restructuring of the conversation will
have serious operational implications
down the road potentially.
Yeah, and it's an interesting
perspective from Australia as well in
this part of the Pacific. But I do
wonder, in addition to what has been a,
you know, a pretty obvious pivot away
from China over the past few years by
the US, you now have the drawdown of not
just that sentiment, but the drawdown of
weaponry as well. How worried would you
be when it comes to Taiwan?
Well, I mean, we see already in Taiwan
that the KMT party's leadership is
signaling that, you know, maybe not now
because the DPP is still in control, but
this based on my own conversation with
Taiwanese folks earlier this year. I
mean, they're already signaling that
they still want a soft landing sometime
down the road. We saw also earlier this
year there were attempts by the KMT,
which was obviously powerful in the
parliament, to frustrate efforts at
increasing Taiwanese defense spending,
increasing Taiwanese purchase of
high-end American weapon system, which
is one of the supposed preconditions of
Trump to be much more forthcoming in
America's commitment to Taiwan in an
event of contingency. But, we know that
any effective way to deter Chinese
kinetic action, or should it happen, to
protect Taiwan, it will have to be
coordinated. The Japanese will have to
be involved, the Philippines have to be
involved. So, you need basically a great
wall of missile defense systems, a great
wall of operational coordination from
Guam to Okinawa to northern Philippines
and obviously in Taiwan. Now, all of
those things uh will have to be studied
again very carefully in light of what's
happening in the Persian Gulf right now
because whatever the Iranians can do,
which obviously has surprised a lot of
people, the Chinese can do on a far
larger scale and with growing
sophistication. So, the game the game
plan has completely changed in Asia, or
at least there's a wake-up call wake-up
call in this part of the world.